the unexpurgated pike report foreword by
philip AG report of the House Select
Committee on Intelligence 1976
publishers note the pike committee
report includes extensive footnotes the
footnotes are too substantial to be both
included here and maintain the
listenable narrative thus the footnotes
were excluded from this audiobook
version interested listeners can find
them in the original PDF version of the
report available on archive.org section
to the select committees investigative
record sea risks the American taxpayer
clearly does not receive full value for
his intelligence dollar the costs of
intelligence should not however be
measured in dollars alone many
day-to-day activities inevitably pose
real risks the committee has found that
when results are measured against
hazards alone certain intelligence
programs may be wholly unacceptable
other projects may to easily stray from
wise and worthwhile courses without
detection it is disturbing that the
consequences of intelligence activities
are sometimes apparently given scant
consideration by policymakers even more
troubling are indications that this
insensitivity continues when dangers
reveal themselves one covert action the
committee has examined CIA covert action
operations and has considerable evidence
that they are irregularly approved
sloppily implemented and at times have
been forced on a reluctant CIA by the
president and his national security
advisor covert action may be defined as
clandestine activity other than purely
information gathering which is directed
at producing a particular political
economic or military result successive
administrations have cited section 102
of the National Security Act of 1947 as
the legal justification for covert
action during the course of this
investigation
special counsel to the director of
Central Intelligence has argued that the
president and his conduct of Foreign
Relations has an inherent constitutional
mandate to authorize these activities on
the other hand in recent years
commentators have maintained that in
establishing the CIA Congress had no
specific intention that covert
operations apart from intelligence
gathering missions be conducted
witnesses before the committee likewise
disputed any inherent constitutional
power to conduct covert actions in any
event Congress has implicitly acquiesced
in covert action through the oversight
process it may be argued that there has
been explicit approval as well just as
the War Powers Act acknowledges the
authority of the President to conduct
overt military hostilities albeit for a
limited period without a congressional
declaration of war the Ryan Hughes
amendment to the foreign assistance Act
of 1974 formally acknowledges the
existence and legality of covert action
the committee has surveyed all 40
committee approvals since 1965 and has
delved deeply into three recent covert
action projects it is believed that the
committee's review of 10 years of covert
action is without precedent in the
Congress or the executive branch a
ten-year survey our primary purpose was
to determine whether the 40 committee
and its predecessors had been exercising
their oversight and control
responsibilities from 1965 to date to do
this it was necessary to trace the
process from proposal to final approval
like other aspects of covert action
fixing responsibility for the initiation
of various covert action projects was a
difficult task as recorded in 40
committee records the vast majority of
projects was submitted by the CIA 88
percent of the total projects since 1965
the high number of covert action
proposals represents a general activism
within the Foreign Affairs bureaucracy
especially with NCI
a the overall picture however does not
support the contention that covert
action has been used in furtherance of
any particular principled form of
government or identifiable national
interest instead the record indicates a
general lack of long-term direction in
u.s. foreign policy covert actions as
the means for implementing a policy
reflected this band-aid approach
substituting short-term remedies for
problems which required long term cures
covert action proposals came from a
variety of interest areas a foreign head
of state the Department of Defense the
Department of State an ambassador CIA
the assistant to the president for
national security affairs a cabinet
member or the President himself
proposals involving a large expenditure
of funds or classified as politically
sensitive required review and approval
of the 40 committee unfortunately the
executive branch does not have a clear
definition of what constitutes a large
or politically sensitive operation
projects of less sensitivity are
approved within the CIA usually at the
level of deputy director of operations
with the determination of political
sensitivity being left to the Director
of Central Intelligence the 40 committee
is chaired by the assistant to the
president for national security affairs
and includes the deputy secretary of
defense the Undersecretary of State for
political affairs the chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and the director
of Central Intelligence theoretically a
detailed proposal is presented to this
group the members are then afforded an
opportunity for a full discussion of the
merits and a reporting of their views to
the president in practice the 40
committee has been little more than a
rubber stamp
the procedures for approval of covert
action have changed with administrations
political conditions and personalities
at various times the approval process
has been relatively informal
extraordinarily secretive and pro forma
while on occasion some projects have
been considered in depth at committee
meetings which included the approval or
disapproval by formal votes several
informal procedures have been frequently
used these informal procedures such as
telephonic votes do not allow each
member to benefit from the views of his
colleagues at times members have been
given only the barest of details and
instead of formal votes have simply been
allowed the opportunity to acknowledge
the project's existence the Forty
committee has only one full-time
professional staff member because of the
high degree of compartment ation
attending these projects committee
members who are among the busiest
officials in government are frequently
in the position of evaluating a complex
proposal without adequate staff support
the assistant to the president for
national security affairs and the
director of Central Intelligence having
the incentive and the resources to cope
with 40 committee business clearly
dominate the process the origin of many
covert action projects is murky at best
the CIA as the prospective
implementation arm is often directed to
produce proposals for covert action and
is therefore incorrectly seen as a plans
original proponent it is clear that on
several occasions involving highly
sensitive projects CIA was summarily
ordered by the President or his National
Security Advisor to carry out a covert
action program it is further clear that
CIA has been ordered to engage in covert
action over the agency's strong prior
objections all evidence in hand suggests
that the CIA far from being out of
control has been utterly responsive to
the instructions of the President and
the assistant to the president for
national security affairs
it must be remembered however that the
CIA director determines which CIA
initiated covert action projects are
sufficiently politically sensitive to
require presidential attention from 1965
to 1972 a majority of approvals occurred
subsequent to a formal committee meeting
although many telephonic approvals also
took place during this period in 1972
the process became quite informal often
involving mere notification to members
that an operation had already been set
in motion by the president the 40
committee as the review and approval
mechanism for covert action fell into
virtual disuse with telephonic approvals
being the rule and formal meetings the
exception one formal meeting was held in
1970 to none in 1973 and 1974 this
process did not begin to reverse itself
until 1975 be election support from 1965
to date 32% of 40 committee approved
covert action projects were for
providing some form of financial
election support to foreign parties and
individuals such support could be
negative as well as positive this is the
largest covert action category and its
funding has occurred in large part in
the developing countries with few
exceptions financial support has been
given to incumbent moderate party
leaders and heads of state certain
projects have had a long life one third
world leader received some nine hundred
sixty thousand dollars over a 14-year
period others were financially supported
for over a decade C media and propaganda
some twenty nine percent of forty
committee approved covert actions were
for media and propaganda projects this
number is probably not representative
staff has determined the existence of a
large number of CIA internally approved
operations of this type
apparently deemed not politically
sensitive it is believed that if the
correct number of all media and
propaganda projects could be determined
it would exceed election support as the
largest single category of covert action
projects undertaken by the CIA
activities have included supportive
friendly media major propaganda efforts
insertion of articles into the local
press and distribution of books and
leaflets by far the largest single
recipient has been a European publishing
house funded since 1951 there are a
number of similar operations in the
region about 25 percent of the program
has been directed at the Soviet bloc in
the publication and clandestine import
and export of Western and Soviet
dissident literature D paramilitary arms
transfers the 23 percent approvals in
this category from 1965 to 1975 have
taken one of essentially four forms
secret armies financial support two
groups engaged in hostilities Parham
military training and advisors and
shipment of arms ammunition and other
military equipment military ordnance is
typically supplied by CIA out of its
large inventory of US weaponry and
captured foreign weapons the committee
scrutinized these projects carefully
since this category is the most
expensive and represents the greatest
potential for escalating hostilities and
deepening American involvement by far
the most interesting and important fact
to emerge was the recognition that the
great majority of these covert action
projects were proposed by parties
outside CIA many of these programs were
summarily ordered over CIA objections
CIA misgivings however were at times
weakly expressed as CIA is afflicted
with a can-do attitude and times CIA has
been used as a conduit for arms
transfers in order to bypass
congressional scrutiny a State
Department proposed project which could
have been accomplished under the
military assistance program was tasked
on CIA because the Department of Defense
did not desire to return to Congress for
additional funds and approval II
organizational support a plethora of
foreign civic religious professional and
labor organizations have received CIA
funding there has been no real
geographical concentration although the
third world was again well represented
for example one Labour Confederation in
a developing country received an annual
subsidy of $30,000 in three successive
years F trends since 1965 there has been
a general decline in the number of
covert action projects approved by the
40 committee there are indications that
the low figure represents the director
of Central Intelligence as determination
that not as many projects should be
considered politically sensitive and
taken to the 40 committee
for approval this in turn may reflect
his recognition that the 40 committee
had fallen into disuse and their
approvals pro forma there is no
indication that the passage of the Ryan
Hughes amendment to the foreign
assistance Act of 1974 requiring
presidential certification and briefings
of congressional oversight committees
has had a significant impact on the
National covert action program as the
events of 1975 have shown those who had
warned that the amendment and the
congressional probes into the US
intelligence community would make covert
action impossible have not seen their
fears realized g3 projects the three
projects examined in depth were selected
from major recent operations apart from
the American experience in Indochina and
involved different types of covert
activity one was election funding of pro
u.s. elements in an allied country
the second was presidential II directed
armed support of an insurgency movement
at the behest of the foreign head of a
third country the last involved a mix of
political action military training and
assistance to pro-western forces in
angola the last project was also
initiated in part at the request of a
third party the committee became aware
of each of these operations through
other parts of its investigation and
through information provided to staff by
sources outside the intelligence
community for example a study of CIA
arms inventories and shipments led to
the major agency paramilitary support
operations the case studies are not
representative of all covert action
since 1965 the committee does believe
that they are not a typical of most
major programs of this type CIA has
indicated its agreement with the
completeness and factual accuracy of the
staffs analysis though not necessarily
with the conclusions case one election
support the u.s. perhaps needlessly
expended some 10 million dollars in
contributions to political parties
affiliated organizations and 21
individual candidates in a recent
parliamentary election held in an allied
country the program was initiated by our
ambassador who later persuaded the
assistant to the president for national
security affairs to authorize him rather
than CIA to select funding recipients
and otherwise controlled the problems
implementation the results of the aid
were mixed and short-lived with National
Assembly elections less than two years
away the u.s. country team concluded
from a CIA contracted survey that the
pro US elements which had governed the
country since the post-war period were
being seriously challenged by the
Communists the opposition apparently
heavily financed by Moscow had scored
gains in regional elections and trailed
the incumbents by only a few points in
the opinion polls pro-west parties and
affiliates had received substantial
funding in the past CIA reports total
u.s. election financing over previous
20-year period at some 65 million
dollars despite this massive aid the
beneficiaries had suffered repeated
electoral setbacks American observers
apparently concluded that another quick
fix was necessary to see out clients
through the next vote anxious to gain
control of the covert program and
fearing that enter agency consideration
would be inhibiting the Ambassador has
originally sought the president's
personal approval of this proposed
political action this course would avoid
the 40 committee and with it the
inevitable role of CIA in implementing
the program the Ambassador was rebuffed
ironically the assistant to the
president then requested that CIA draft
a proposal without the knowledge of the
Ambassador or the Department of State it
is known that during this period the
president was indirectly approached by
prominent international businessmen
who were former Nationals of the Allied
country their communications to the
president were not available to the
committee the 40 committee subsequently
approved the CIA proposal but with
unusual implementation despite the usual
near automatic control of covert action
by CIA the Ambassador by all accounts a
man of unusual force successfully
extracted from the assistant to the
president the commitment that he would
have total control of the mix and
implementation of the project thus the
Ambassador who had been in the country
less than two years and did not speak
the language would determine which
individuals and organizations would
receive US funds the CIA station would
be reduced to couriers the agency
expressed concern that a high profile by
the Ambassador would needlessly
compromise the program their complaints
fell on deaf ears despite the agreement
of all that exposure would bring down
the pro-west government a major
political party received 3.4 million
dollars
a political organization created and
supported by CIA 3.4 million dollars
other organizations and parties a total
of 1.3 million dollars substantial funds
were provided to several incumbents
whose seats did not appear in jeopardy
of a total of eleven point eight million
dollars approved by the 40 committee
only nine point nine million dollars was
actually spent the reserve was held to
be spent in the following year
CIA concurred and most of the recipients
chosen by the ambassador
although differences were expressed on
precise amounts there were serious
disagreements over some recipients one
of these was a high local intelligence
official to whom the Ambassador wanted
to give over $800,000 to conduct a
propaganda effort the Ambassador was
unmoved by CIA warnings that the man was
clearly linked to anti-democratic
elements of the right and went ahead
with the funding embassy control of the
funds was poor
participants in the program testified
before the committee that little effort
was made to earmark grants or failing
that at least seek assurances that the
money was spent as intended by the 40
committee the Ambassador resisted most
CIA control suggestions insisting that
such monitoring would insult the
recipient thus there is almost no
accounting or control of the
expenditures there is no indication that
the Ambassador began to encounter
interference from Washington at this
point the fruits of this US investment
are difficult to assess the pro US
elements retained control of the
government by a small plurality and most
of the incumbents supported were
returned to office on the other hand the
ruling coalition quickly lost public
support and suffered severe reverses in
subsequent local elections case two the
president's program records of the 40
committee revealed that President
Richard M Nixon and Henry a Kissinger at
the behest of a foreign head of state
unilaterally directed the CIA to provide
arms and money to an insurgent group in
a third country the president acted
despite the fact that both the CIA and
the Department of State had rejected
similar operations on three occasions
over the previous two years and despite
a prior disapproval by dr. Kissinger as
assistant to the president for national
security affairs the program ultimately
to involve some 16 million dollars was
apparently endorsed by the president
after a private meeting with the foreign
head of state and dr. Kissinger there
was no 40 committee meeting at which a
formal proposal paper containing both
pros and cons could be discussed and
voted on instead members were simply
directed to acknowledge receipt of a
sparse 1 paragraph description of the
operation in a setting of almost
unprecedented secrecy within the US
government John B Connolly the former
Treasury secretary about to assume a
major role in the president's reelection
campaign personally advised the head of
state that the US would cooperate the
recipients of us arms in cash were an
insurgent ethnic group fighting for
autonomy in a country bordering our ally
the bordering country and our ally had
long been bitter enemies they differed
substantially in ideological orientation
and in their relations with the US
evidence is collected by the committee
suggests that the project was initially
primarily as a favor to our ally who had
cooperated with US intelligence agencies
and who had come to feel menaced by his
neighbor as our allies aid dwarfed the
US aid package now our assistance can be
seen as largely symbolic documents made
available to the committee indicate that
the u.s. acted in effect as a guarantor
that the insurgent group would not be
summarily dropped by the foreign head of
state notwithstanding these implicit
assurances the insurgents were abruptly
cut off by our ally three years
thousands of deaths and 16 million u.s.
dollars later it appears that head the
u.s. not reinforced our allies prodding
insurgents may have reached an
accommodation with the central
government thus gaining at least a
measure of autonomy while avoiding
further bloodshed instead our clients
fought on sustaining thousands of
casualties and 200,000 refugees there is
little doubt that the highly unusual
security precautions and the
circumvention of the forty Committee
where the product of fears by the
President and dr. Kissinger that details
of the project would otherwise leak a
result which by all accounts would have
mightily displeased our ally it is also
clear that the secrecy was motivated by
a desire that the Department of State
which had consistently opposed such
ventures in the region be kept in the
dark perhaps more than the president's
disregard of the 40 committee the
apparent no-win policy of the US and its
ally deeply disturbed this committee
documents in the committee's possession
clearly show that the president dr.
Kissinger and
the foreign head of state hoped that our
clients would not prevail they preferred
instead that the insurgents simply
continue a level of hostilities
sufficient to SAP the resources of our
allies neighboring country this policy
was not imparted to our clients who were
encouraged to continue fighting even in
the context of covert action ours was a
cynical enterprise
it is particularly ironic that despite
President Nixon's and dr. Kissinger's
encouragement of hostilities to keep the
target country off-balance the United
States personally restrained the
insurgents from an all-out offensive on
one occasion when such an attack might
have been successful because other
events were occupying the neighboring
country all US aid was channeled through
our collaborator without whose
logistical help direct assistance would
have been impossible our national
interest had thus become effectively
meshed with his accordingly when our
ally reached an agreement with the
target country and abruptly ended his
own aid to the insurgents the u.s. had
no choice but to acquiesce the extent of
our allies leverage over US policy was
such that he apparently made no effort
to notify his junior American partners
that the program's end was near the
insurgents were clearly taken by
surprise as well
their adversaries knowing of the
impending aid cutoff launched an all-out
search and destroy campaign the day
after the agreement was signed the
autonomy movement was over and our
former clients scattered before the
central government's superior forces the
cynicism of the US and its ally had not
yet completely run its course however
despite direct pleas from the insurgent
leader and the CIA station chief in the
area to the President and dr. Kissinger
the u.s. refused to extend humanitarian
assistance to the thousands of refugees
created by the abrupt termination of
military aid as the committee staff was
reminded by a high US official quote
covert action
should not be confused with missionary
work and quote case three Angola for
reasons not altogether clear and despite
the opposition of senior government
officials the US has been heavily
involved in the current civil war in
Angola the CIA has informed the
committee that since January 1975 it had
expended over 31 million dollars in
military hardware transportation costs
and cash payments by the end of 1975 the
committee has reason to believe that the
actual US investment is much higher
information supplied to the committee
also suggests that the military
intervention of the Soviet Union and
Cuba is in large part a reaction to US
efforts to break a political stalemate
in favor of its clients the
beneficiaries of US aid are two of the
three contesting factions the National
Front for the independence of Angola
FNLA and the National Union for the
total independence of Angola un ITA the
third faction contesting for control of
the government following independence on
November 11th 1975 is the Soviet backed
popular movement for the liberation of
Angola MPLA CIA estimates that the
fighting had claimed several thousand
casualties by the end of 1975 the main
US client is the National Front headed
by Holden Roberto a longtime associate
and relative of president Mobutu Sese
Seko of neighboring Zaire subsequent to
President Mobutu's request last winter
to dr. Kissinger as independence for
Angola became a certainty and liberation
groups began to jockey for position the
40 committee approved furnishing Roberto
$300,000 for various political action
activities restricted to non military
objectives later events have suggested
that this infusion of US aid
unprecedented and massive in the
underdeveloped colony may have panicked
the Soviets into arming their MPLA
clients whom they had backed for over a
decade and who were now in danger of be
eclipsed by the national front events in
Angola took a bellicose turn as the US
was requested by president Mobutu to
make a serious military investment in
early June 1975 CIA prepared a proposal
paper for military aid to pro US
elements in Angola the cost of which was
set at six million dollars a revised
program costing fourteen million dollars
was approved by the 40 committee and by
President Ford in July this was
increased to twenty five million dollars
in August and to about thirty two
million dollars in November
by mid-summer it was decided that US aid
should not be given solely to Roberto
but instead divided between him and UN I
TAS Jonas Savimbi the committee has
learned that a task force composed of
high u.s. experts in Africa strongly
opposed military intervention instead
last April they called for diplomatic
efforts to encourage a political
settlement among the three factions to
avert bloodshed apparently at the
direction of National Security Council
aides the task force recommendation was
removed from the report and presented to
NSC members as merely one policy option
the other two alternatives were a
hands-off policy or substantial military
intervention of CIA's 31 million dollar
figure said to represent expenditures to
the end of 1975 about half is attributed
to supply of light arms mortars
ammunition vehicles boats and
communication equipment the balance
includes shipping expenses and cash
payments the committee has reason to
question the accuracy of CIA's valuation
of military equipment sent to Angola a
staff accountant on loan from the
General Accounting Office has determined
that CIA
costing procedures and the use of
surplus equipment have resulted in a
substantial understatement of the value
of US aid examples include 45 caliber
automatic weapons valued by CIA at 50
$100 each
and 30 caliber semi-automatic carbines
at $7 55 cents based on a sampling of
ordnance cost figures and a comparison
with Department of Defense procedures
staff advises that the CIA's ordnance
figure should at least be doubled dr.
Kissinger has indicated that US military
intervention in Angola is based on three
factors Soviet support of the MPLA and
the USSR's increased presence in Africa
US policy to encourage moderate
independence groups in southern Africa
and the US interest in promoting the
stability of Mobutu and other leadership
figures in the area past support to
Mobutu along with his responsiveness to
some of the United States recent
diplomatic needs for third world support
make it equally likely that the
paramount factor in the u.s. involvement
is dr. Kissinger's desire to reward and
protect African leaders in the area the
US has expressed opposition to the MPLA
is puzzling in view of director Colby's
statement to the committee that there
are scant ideological differences among
the three factions all of whom are
nationalists above all else control of
resources may be a factor Angola has
significant oil deposits and two
American multinationals Gulf and Texaco
operate in the offshore area Gulf had
deposited some one hundred million
dollars in concession fees in a National
Bank now under MPLA control at the
suggestion of the US government the
company has suspended further payments
until recently the US backed national
front was supported by the People's
Republic of China which had provided
about 100 military advisers Mobutu has
provided a staging area for US arms
shipments and has periodically sent his
IRS troops trained by the Republic of
North Korea into Angola to support
Roberto's operations small numbers of
South African forces have been in the
country and are known to have been in
contact with Savimbi's un ITA forces
pursuant to section 662 of the foreign
assistance Act of 1974
the president has found that the Angola
action program is quote important to the
national security end quote as directed
by the act
CIA has briefed the congressional
oversight committees as to the 40
committee approvals of increased amounts
of military aid CIA officials have
testified to the committee that there
appears to be little hope of an outright
MPLA military defeat instead US efforts
are now aimed at promoting a stalemate
and in turn the ceasefire and the
coalition government urged by the long
forgotten NSC task force to intelligence
collection human and diplomatic risks
are not confined to covert action
certain methods of intelligence
gathering invite the same danger of war
and infringement of the constitutional
rights of Americans the committee has
examined both technical and
non-technical intelligence gathering
programs and has concluded that the
risks accompanying them are often
unacceptably great that information
obtained often does not justify the risk
the policymakers have been insensitive
to dangers especially of the violation
of u.s. citizens rights and that there
are inadequate policy level mechanisms
for the regular review of risk
assessment a submarines a highly
technical US Navy submarine
reconnaissance program often operating
within unfriendly waters has experienced
at least nine collisions with hostile
vessels in the last ten years over 110
possible detections
and at least three press exposures most
of the submarines carry nuclear weapons
the program clearly produces useful
information on our adversaries training
exercises weapons testing and general
naval capabilities it is also clear
however that the program is inherently
risky committee staffs review of the
program suggests if both Congress and
the Department of the Navy
were sufficiently motivated to provide
the funds
technical capabilities could be
developed which would make possible the
acquisition of the same data through
less hazardous means the Navy's own
justification of the program as a
low-risk venture is inaccurate and has
therefore not met or resolved the
committee's misgivings documents
provided the committee by the Defense
Department indicate that while risk
assessments are made prior to operations
they are ritualistic and pro-forma in
fact their mission risk assessments do
not vary despite constant changes in
political conditions information sought
distance from enemy Shores and hostile
forces and our adversaries ability to
detect the presence of US submarines
during the hundreds of missions these
submarines have conducted the Navy has
never assessed military risk as anything
but low the committee is therefore
troubled by the completely pro-forma
nature of the mission risk assessment as
it is presently accomplished just as the
Navy's assurances that the program is
secure are inconsistent with the
collisions apparent detections
and press stories their claims that
these sensitive missions are closely
monitored are belied by the scant
technical guidance given commanders and
regular communications gaps once a u.s.
submarine enters the 12-mile limit of
another nation communications security
and the lack of certain technical
capabilities make it impossible to
independently verify the location of a
submarine at any given moment
many of these difficulties result from
factors which are inherent in the nature
of this covert operation naval inquiries
into collisions and other untoward
incidents if held at all are almost
always conducted at a low level
effectively keeping policymakers in the
dark on changing operational conditions
thus it took a field initiated low-level
investigation conducted after three
collisions in 1970 to determine that pre
mission training and operational
guidelines for u.s. submarines on this
type of sensitive mission needed
revision and up
grading if washington-based review had
been adequate it would not have taken
this field investigation to determine
that us submarines were following other
submarines too closely in addition staff
found no evidence which would indicate
that commanders of submarines colliding
with hostile vessels have ever received
disciplinary action of any kind at times
commanders have escaped censure despite
recommendations to that effect by a
review panel despite these faults the
committee noted the procedures
implemented by the Navy to ensure the
safety of the mission and the crew in
situations which are inherently risky
washington-based control review and
coordination of this program has been an
evolutionary matter over the years and
present it appears to be extremely well
managed with the exception of the risk
assessment area and the failure to
forward the results of low-level
investigations for Washington based
review in reviewing past investigations
and formal reviews the committee noted
the Navy's implementation of previous
suggestions for change there is however
one unfortunate exception a previous
review of this program suggested that
the Department of the Navy make a firm
commitment to the necessity of
maintaining an intelligence capability
with u.s. submarines by allocating funds
to research and development efforts
designed to increase both the
capabilities and the security of their
missions the Navy has paid only lip
service to this commitment given these
factors the committee urges a thorough
review of the program's product and
hazards to avert another Pueblo or worse
and to ensure that important
intelligence collection continues with
significantly less risk than presently
exists
B interception of international
communications the National Security
Agency NSA systematically intercepts
international communications both voice
and cable NSA officials and the director
of Central Intelligence concede that
messages to and from American citizens
and businesses have been picked up in
the course of gathering foreign
communications intelligence they
maintain however that these messages are
small in number and usually discarded in
any case earlier NSA programs of
questionable legality focused on
international narcotics traffic and
radicalism and even targeted Americans
the committee's preliminary
investigation reveals at least one new
area of non-political and non-military
emphasis in international intercept
economic intelligence communications
interception in this area has rapidly
developed since 1972 partly in reaction
to the Arab oil embargo and the failure
to obtain good information on Russian
grain production and negotiations for
the purchase with American corporations
the committee is not convinced that the
current commercial intercept program has
yielded sufficiently valuable data to
justify its high cost and intrusion
however inadvertent into the privacy of
international communications of US
citizens and organizations and as much
as the technical complexity of the
program defies easy or quick evaluation
the committee is hopeful that a
permanent oversight mechanism will
closely and comprehensively scrutinize
the operation to determine whether the
risks are necessary and acceptable see
manipulation of the media the free flow
of information vital to a responsible
and credible press has been threatened
as a result of CIA's use of the world
media for cover and for clandestine
information gathering there are
disturbing indications that the accuracy
of many news stories has been undermined
as
well information supplied to the
committee suggests that some planted
falsified articles have reached readers
in the US intelligence agencies have
long prized journalists as informants
and identity covers news men generally
enjoy great mobility and are often
admitted to areas denied to ordinary
businessman or to suspected intelligence
times not expected to work in one fixed
location both bona fide journalists and
masquerading intelligence officers can
move about without arousing suspicion
they also have extraordinary access to
important foreign leaders and diplomats
CIA has no doubt every other major
intelligence agency in the world has
manipulated the media full-time foreign
correspondents for major US publications
have worked concurrently for CIA passing
along information received in the normal
course of their regular jobs and even on
occasion traveling to otherwise non
newsworthy areas to acquire data far
more prevalent is the agency's practice
of retaining freelancers and stringers
as informants a stringer working in a
less newsworthy country could supply
stories to a newspaper radio and a
weekly magazine none of whom can justify
a full-time correspondent this may make
the use of stringers even more insidious
than exploitation of full-time
journalists the committee has learned
that the employment of news men by CIA
is usually without the knowledge or
agreement of the employers back in the
u.s. publishers have been unable despite
strenuous effort to learn from the
agency which if any of their employees
have had a clandestine intelligence
function newsmen informants apparently
do not often disclose this relationship
to their editors the committee has
learned of cases in which informants
moved from one bona fide press position
to another without ever making employers
aware of their past or present CIA
status CIA acknowledges that stringers
and others with whom the agency has a
relationship
often directed to insert agency composed
news articles into foreign publications
and wire services US intelligence
officials do not rule out the
possibility that these planted stories
may find their way into American
newspapers from time to time but insist
that CIA does not intentionally
propagandize in this country CIA
insensitivity to the possibility of its
adulterating news digested by Americans
is indicated by its frequent
manipulation of Reuters wire service
dispatches which regularly appear in US
media because Reuters is British at is
considered fair game a number of CIA
officers employed by u.s. and foreign
publications write nothing at all their
journalistic affiliation is a cover a
sham arrangement making possible
full-time clandestine work for the
agency with these arrangements the
employers cooperation has been obtained
after the Washington star news
discovered a CIA media relationship in
1973 director Colby ordered a review of
these practices subsequently the agency
terminated the informant relationships
of five full-time employees of American
periodicals stringers and freelancers
are still on the payroll
despite their periodic reporting for a
u.s. media usually unaware of the
writers CIA connection the use of
American press enterprises as a cover
has been tightened somewhat no longer
for example can a CIA officer in the
field arrange for cover without
headquarters approval director Colby
citing the agency's continuing need for
reliable information and the increasing
reluctance of private firms and the
government to provide cover has
maintained that the recent reforms have
reduced risk to an acceptable level d
CIA presence in the executive branch CIA
personnel may be found in a host of US
departments and agencies in the National
Security Council and in the White House
itself typically their agency
affiliations are unknown to colleagues
and to all others except one or two
leadership figures they sit on
interagency panels whose members are
unwitting in some cases these panels
already include another official CIA
representative giving CIA undue
representation some of them work in
positions involving evaluation of CIA's
work product and proposals
these individuals are detailees CIA
employees on loan to the executive
usually at the latter's request they
include all types from gardeners and
typists to intelligence analysts and
practitioners of covert action detailees
are requested for a variety of reasons
because the White House wants to
circumvent congressional budget ceilings
because there are no other available
secretaries with security clearances
because CIA professional expertise is
highly regarded or because the position
had always been staffed by an agency
officer the committee has found no
indications that CIA detailees are
instructed to make clandestine reports
to headquarters on the inner workings of
the hosts employer nor is there credible
evidence that they are asked by CIA to
perform in any manner which is
inconsistent with the best interests of
the hosts nonetheless the committee
believes that detailing is presently
practiced reflects an unwise policy at
best intelligence personnel such as
clerical help are diverted from CIA
duties
thus frustrating the budget allocating
intent of Congress a far worse specter
is that of CIA officers assigned to such
posts as the National Security Council
where they are susceptible despite all
good intentions two substantial
conflicts of interest on the most
sensitive issues
the latter problem is compounded by the
fact that the detailees background
often is unknown to NSC colleagues who
are also charged with CIA related
responsibilities the committee
discovered detailees whose agency ties
were closely held secrets making
recommendations on CIA covert action
proposals to unwitting senior NSC
officials such individuals also helped
conduct the NSCs evaluation of the
intelligence product and in that
capacity regularly compare CIA's
performance with that of rival agencies
these individuals have impressed staff
as highly motivated professionals
acutely aware of the problems resulting
from divided loyalties their integrity
is not at issue but neither the White
House nor the CIA is well served by an
unnecessary policy which invites
cynicism and compromises the quality of
executive branch oversight of the
intelligence community e CIA
relationships with u.s. and foreign
police in creating this CIA Congress
clearly intended to deny it any domestic
police functions their fear that a
super-secret bureaucratically powerful
spy agency might evolve into a domestic
secret police has not been realized
despite shortcomings in control and
oversight evidence in committee files
however indicates that during the late
1960s and early 1970s CIA allowed itself
to become involved in domestic police
activity in addition the agency
undertook other police assistance
activities which jeopardized the
integrity of an otherwise legitimate and
useful US foreign aid program
association and collaboration with u.s.
police notwithstanding its charters
clear prohibition against internal
security functions CIA has maintained
relationships many entirely appropriate
with various federal state and local law
enforcement agencies questionable
activities prior to the Holtzman
amendment to the Omnibus Crime Control
and safe
streets acts of 1968 included the
training by CIA of domestic police and
loans of agency equipment for domestic
use in return local police departments
cooperated with CIA on matters of
concern to the agency's office of
security both activities appear to have
been improper the first violated the
charters ban on domestic police
functions and the latter tended to
circumvent jurisdiction of the FBI and
the Department of Justice of these
activities CIA's role as a source of
ordinary as well as exotic equipment is
perhaps the most troubling and
publicized the agency has loaned such
traditional gear as body protectors
billy clubs mace and similar civil
disturbance paraphernalia most of the
equipment was provided during the height
of the anti-vietnam war movement and may
have been used by local police during
the may 1971 demonstrations in
Washington more exotic loans consisted
of decoders clandestine transmitters
analyzers and other wiretapping devices
a staff examination of these practices
reveals that CIA officials usually
provided equipment on a
no-questions-asked basis did not require
the production of court orders for
eavesdropping gear and exercised
virtually no control over the loaned
items the record suggests that on one
occasion CIA loaned equipment was used
in an illegal wiretap in June 1971 mr.
Kenyon F Baloo was severely wounded
during a raid on his apartment by agents
of the Division of Alcohol Tobacco and
Firearms supported by police from
Montgomery and Prince George's counties
in Maryland the raid was conducted
pursuant to a federal search warrant for
possession of suspected firearms and
hand grenades plainclothes agents and
police officers broke down the door to
the apartment when mr. Ballew failed to
answer their knock mr. Ballew a gun
collector picked up a pistol was shot
and is now permanently disabled he is
partially paralyzed
walks only with the aid of a brace and
Kane speaks with difficulty and still
has the police bullet lodged in his
brain mr. Ballew was never prosecuted
for any gun control violations the case
received a large amount of publicity and
was the subject of a number of
investigations of alleged police
misconduct mr. Ballew brought suit
pursuant to the federal torts Claims Act
and received an adverse judgment from
the courts in February 1975 a CIA office
of security employee assigned to liaison
with the montgomery county police
department told staff that in a
conversation with a police inspector on
the Balu case the possible use of CIA
loaned bugging equipment was revealed he
was advised that police intercepted a
telephone conversation and which plans
were outlined to quote kill a cop end
quote
however neither the affidavit in support
of the search warrant these subsequent
investigations nor the transcript of the
civil suit reflected the existence of
any wiretap mr. Bhalla case is now on
appeal and if there had been an illegal
wiretap he may be entitled to a new
trial while the Department of Justice's
CIA task force has been made aware of
this possible wiretap for months it has
apparently refused both to act upon it
and to notify the attorneys in the case
CIA involvement with foreign police from
the early 1950s until late 1973 CIA
operated a proprietary international
police services IPs in the Washington DC
area it had the dual purpose of
improving allies internal security and
evaluating foreign cadets for pro-us
orientation which might later enable CIA
to recruit them as intelligence assets
in the early 1960s the Agency for
International Development Office of
Public Safety AI D o-p-s became actively
involved in foreign police training
Oh PS is 14 week course was augmented by
an additional four weeks of training at
IPs pursuant to a contractual
arrangement with AI D students were not
made aware that they were being trained
at a CIA facility and only a handful of
AI D officials including the director of
o-p-s knew of IPS ha's CIA status
instructors were asked to record names
of students who demonstrated a
pro-american attitude it does not appear
however that the CIA attempted to
recruit students while in the United
States although CIA documents indicate
that with the cooperation of o-p-s lists
of o-p-s and IPS students were made
available along with biographical
information to CIA components for
operational use as many as 5,000 foreign
police officers from over 100 countries
many of whom have become high officials
unwittingly received training from the
CIA the positions of these foreign
police officers may have been damaged
when in 1973 IPS was revealed as a CIA
front in addition to damaging the
credibility of these foreign police
officers CIA's apparently unnecessary
involvement with a legitimate foreign
aid program could have seriously
undermined that program from a
propaganda standpoint despite these
realities AI D o PS continued its
relationship with IPs until late 1973
Department of State and AI D officials
should review these practices and
develop alternative methods of
administering foreign aid programs
without CIA involvement and support
three domestic intelligence
investigations domestic intelligence
carries with it two distinct types of
risks there are programs that by their
very nature and methods offend
individual liberties and statutory
rights then there are legitimate
intelligence methods that are improperly
applied turning the law enforcers into
lawbreakers a pro
as abuses COINTELPRO was a series of
covert counterintelligence programs
aimed at identifying penetrating and
neutralizing subversive elements in the
United States the program itself
consisted of myriad clandestine dirty
tricks carried out by FBI agents against
persons and organizations considered
subversive by the FBI careers were
ruined friendships severed reputations
sullied businesses bankrupted and in
some cases lives endangered the FBI
justified this aberration from
traditional law enforcement programs by
stating that it was dictated by the mood
of the times the FBI as implementers of
the program thereby became the barometer
of the country's mood instead of
fulfilling their statutory function of
enforcing federal laws evidence received
by the committee of FBI racism bias and
strong conservative ideology hardly
qualifies it to review people's politics
moreover the Constitution prohibits such
a role and protects the very things FBI
was attempting to punish COINTELPRO is
only one example another would be
programs grouped under anticipatory
intelligence FBI states quote because
the FBI is investigative
responsibilities follow the contours of
those entrusted to the Attorney General
the bureau's domestic intelligence
investigations are of necessity broader
than investigations strictly designed to
collect evidence for criminal
proceedings the FBI's domestic
intelligence responsibilities have a
distinct anticipatory or preventive
purpose requiring continuing
investigative activity in cases where in
criminal conduct remains a future
possibility whereas the evidence
required to initiate an investigation
under such a standard would obviously be
something less than probable cause of a
crime it would nevertheless be more than
mere suspicion the FBI itself states
that advocacy of an ideology alone
is not sufficient grounds for
classifying a group as subversive
anticipatory domestic intelligence
projects however do create serious
problems on occasion a few examples
illustrate the point
Laurie Patton testified before the
committee on November 18th 1975 in 1974
ms Patton then a high school student
inadvertently wrote the social worker's
party as an academic assignment she
intended to write to the socialist Labor
Party the FBI was conducting a mail
cover on the swp and intercepted miss
Patton's misdirected letter they
immediately began an investigation of
her and the attendant publicity in Miss
Patton's small town caused her great
mental anguish
the bureau's response was that the quote
FBI did not publicize the fact end quote
of Laurie Patton's investigation
although they had interviewed her school
principal and the local police chief
assume however that Miss Patton had
correctly written to the swp as many
people undoubtedly have that fact alone
would apparently have been grounds for
an anticipatory investigation even
though it is hard to imagine what crimes
could be anticipated by writing a letter
in addition the chilling effect such
investigations have on First Amendment
rights including freedom of association
is painfully clear for those who do join
swp the chill is likely to spread to
employers the committee heard from one
witness who termed FBI's inquiries about
his employee
Bruce boy who was an swp member as quote
presumptive mysterious and aggressive
end quote trash covers are another
odious form of anticipatory
investigations the IPS trash cover has
already been discussed saved for a
comment on command and control when FBI
personnel were originally asked about
trash covers by committee staff they
stated quote we have not engaged in
trash covers since July 1966 we had no
trash covers on the IPS end quote
two weeks later at a committee hearing
they corrected themselves they stated
that while there was an FBI policy of
not conducting trash covers that policy
was not always followed two memoranda
show that the bureau knew of the trash
covers and recognized the risks in such
a method the concerns the quote
potential harm to the FBI and the
federal government per se far outweighed
the potential information that could be
expected end quote
it was not risks to an individual's
right of privacy that concerned the FBI
be law enforcement turned law breaking
the use of informants albeit an
effective law enforcement tool is a
method of investigation which is
particularly subject to abuses of
constitutional rights and rights of
privacy the committee heard testimony
from a former FBI informant named Robert
Hardy mr. Hardy chronicled for the
committee his role in a 1971 Camden
draft board break-in pursuant to FBI
instructions he infiltrated a peaceful
anti-war group in Camden New Jersey he
instigated the burglary and supplied the
would-be burglars with tools money
technical assistance and encouragement
and some mr. Hardy acted as an agent
provocateur at one point he attempted to
halt the actual burglary because a
conspiracy had been established his FBI
handling agents insisted that the
burglary be committed the disturbing
lesson is that in the FBI system there
is virtually no mechanism to control
agents in charge of informants the FBI
manual of instructions on informants
sets forth specific guidelines for the
handling of informants yet the
uniqueness and secrecy surrounding each
informants relationship with the
handling agent and pairs the
effectiveness of those instructions in
the hardy case the informant agent
relationship was further complicated by
political considerations they defend
in a celebrated case in nearby
Harrisburg Pennsylvania and recently
been acquitted of all conspiracy counts
the FBI apparently felt that an overt
act such as an actual break-in would be
required to ensure a conviction even
though the alleged crime of conspiracy
which was the basis of later prosecution
appears to have been completed far in
advance of the actual break-in it should
be noted that Department of Justice
attorneys were advised of this situation
long before the break-in and did nothing
to avert the course of events the
committee investigated another example
of lack of control over informants the
FBI used Robert Merritt as an informant
on new left activities during the early
1970s his duties included reporting on
activities at the Institute of policy
studies Merritt told the committee that
his FBI handling agents instructed him
to conduct break-ins deliver unopened
mail acquired illegally and solicit and
provide information to the FBI regarding
homosexual proclivities of politically
prominent people and individuals of the
new left the FBI agents who handled
merit denied these allegations under
oath they stated that merit acted on his
own
the handling agents stated that they
terminated merit because they
ascertained that he had provided false
information on one occasion and had
reason to believe he provided false
information at other times in the past
if this was true it does not fit with
other facts during the seven months that
Merritt was an FBI informant he provided
over 100 reports on at least 25 people
he had in fact been categorized as
reliable in FBI records no effort was
ever made to correct the merit reports
by indicating that the information
contained therein might be unreliable no
prosecute of actions were ever
recommended as a result of merits
allegedly wrong actions his efforts
apparently fit well with intelligence
operations furthermore
Merritt told staff that he had committed
numerous illegal acts at the direction
of district of Columbus Metropolitan
Police his FBI handling agents stated
that although they acquired merit from
the Metropolitan Police Department they
never inquired as to the nature of his
prior activities as a police informant
this attitude of see no evil hear no
evil appears to violate the seemingly
rigid regulations of the FBI manual
designed to affect the recruitment of
responsible and reliable informants
conflicting testimony in the Merritt
mater reveals the problem itself since
FBI agents instructions to their
informants are by necessity given orally
and without witnesses it is difficult if
not impossible to accurately fix
responsibility for an informants actions
if the FBI agent is at fault
the problem becomes one of
administrative command and control if
however the informant has gone bad the
problem is more difficult for example if
an informant successfully instigates
others to commit a crime as in the hardy
matter his FBI contact agent may
overlook the informants improper actions
because the informant is important to a
case for which the FBI agent is likely
to receive credit the risk that
informants may use illegal methods is
heightened when one considers the kind
of person needed to infiltrate suspected
criminal elements understanding the
problem James Adams assistant to the
director of FBI testified before the
committee on November 18 1975 quote the
informants you develop are not recruited
from Sunday schools end quote
the dubious character of most informants
is compounded by the fact that
informants are paid cash and their
payment is commensurate with the
information they furnish the more
incriminating the information the more
lucrative the reward electronic
surveillance the Kissinger wiretap in
the last half
century electronic technology has
revolutionized the science of
investigations these developments also
mean that Big Brother may be watching
improper application of electronic
surveillance poses obvious risks because
of its enormous potential for invading
privacy and the difficulty of detecting
intrusion some examples follow in the
spring of 1969 the Nixon White House was
disturbed that extremely sensitive
information regarding diplomatic
relations and national security was
leaking to the press on a fairly regular
basis on May 9th 1969 William Beecher of
the New York Times wrote an article on
Cambodia which triggered a strong
reaction from the White House that day a
series of telephone calls to ascertain
the source of the leaks took place the
calls were between dr. Kissinger and J
Edgar Hoover and between Colonel
Alexander Haig and FBI personnel the
apparent result of these consultations
was the installation of a wiretap on the
residence of a National Security Council
staff on May 9th 1969 significantly
approval for this national security
wiretap was not requested until May 10th
1969 the wiretap was requested by
Colonel Haig quote on the highest
authority end quote and was not approved
by Attorney General John Mitchell until
May 12th 1969
17 persons were eventually wiretapped
pursuant to this program although the
FBI never overheard information
indicating any breach of national
security the taps continued for lengthy
periods of time no approval was ever
sought for extensions of the wiretap as
they continued unabated and unsupervised
in addition the FBI continued to report
information which can only be
characterized as political or personal
Williams C Sullivan former chief of
intelligence for the FBI told staff that
FBI director J Edgar Hoover did not
regard these tapes as FBI operations but
as a
negative requests according to mr.
Sullivan Hoover insisted on sending
copies of the transcripts directly to
the White House so the president would
be apprised of the service FBI was
providing several risks were inherent in
the FBI's national security wiretaps
installed for dr. Kissinger the first
involved wiretapping United States
citizens without prior judicial approval
these dangers were recognized by the
Supreme Court in 1972 the court held
that electronic surveillance of domestic
organizations or citizens was forbidden
unless prior judicial approval was
obtained secondly wiretapping State
Department officials and members of the
press tends to stifle voices of
criticism and dissenting views and
infringes upon freedom of the press
finally the Kissinger wiretap posed a
risk that the FBI could become the tool
by which an administration in power
obtains political information the
Houston episode on October 9th 1975
Anthony Zavala a former narcotics
officer with the Houston Police
Department who had been sentenced to
three years imprisonment on wiretap
convictions told the committee of
widespread illegal police wiretapping in
Houston Texas from 1969 through 1972 mr.
Zavala recounted that wiretapping had
become quote second nature to us all end
quote and quote that it was all
discussed freely and that everyone knew
what was going on end quote
in 1973 Anthony J P Farris United States
Attorney for the Southern District of
Texas learned of allegations of
wiretapping he brought this information
to the attention of the FBI in the fall
of 1973 and requested that the bureau
investigate they did not his requests
continued finally in April 1974 the FBI
assigned one special agent to
investigate the case he filed reports
which according to Farris were quote
notable only in their
of substance consisting largely of
xeroxed newspaper articles and quote for
salt political control of intelligence
nowhere is the risk of corrupting
intelligence greater than in recent
efforts to restrict and shape important
data on Soviet compliance with strategic
arms agreements staff investigation and
examination of key documents reveal that
these salt treaties which are of grave
strategic significance were consummated
without full intelligence input that the
prime US official who sponsored the
accords also effectively controls the
verification of their feasibility and
that day-to-day intelligence analysis of
compliance is hindered by arbitrary and
inconsistent attempts to prevent leaks
of salt data the prime factor in this
situation is dr. Kissinger with his
passion for secrecy and his efforts to
concentrate power and to consolidate
ultimate control of important
intelligence functions there his various
bureaucratic roles it is clear that in
the final stages of the salt talks US
negotiators did not fully consult or
inform intelligence experts who had been
key figures in previous treaty sessions
only Russian technical experts were on
hand dr. Kissinger's private talks with
Soviet leaders in this period were not
disseminated some officials assert that
ambiguities which plagued the Accords
may have been the result of US
policymakers self-imposed intelligence
blackout at the critical moment the
record indicates that dr. Kissinger u.s.
architect of the Accords has attempted
to control the dissemination and
analysis of data on apparent Soviet
violations of the salt pact
although CIA as the government's
principal analytical arm has both
general and specific responsibility for
the monitoring of salt compliance the
assistant to the president for national
security affairs has advised the agency
to avoid any written judgment that the
so v
it's are in violation of salt agreements
such findings were to be privately
communicated to the National Security
Council which coincidentally was headed
by dr. Kissinger when sensitive
intelligence reports on Soviet
compliance began to turn up with
regularity the National Security Council
initiated the procedure of severely
restricting dissemination of the
information by causing it to be placed
in a hold status typically the CIA
deputy director for intelligence would
and consultation with NSC staff place an
item on hold until dr. Kissinger or his
representative agreed to release it two
principal reasons have been given for
access restriction fear of leaks by
officials seeking to influence us salt
policy and the need for adequate time to
determiner reports real significance
thus avoiding rash judgments on
complicated technical issues this
unusual procedure invoked previously in
such momentous situations as the 1962
Cuban Missile Crisis has been strangely
implemented this time at times the
Secretary of State the director of the
arms control and disarmament agency and
key US officials and salt compliance
meetings with the Soviets have not been
aware of the existence of sensitive data
suggesting Soviet cheating dissemination
within several intelligence components
has been haphazard and uncontrolled two
other problems with the hold process
detract from the integrity of the
intelligence product NSC staff for
example has influenced the timing and
content of intelligence community
publications worse both high officials
and working-level analysts have been cut
off from information for periods of time
ranging from days to 6 months dr.
Kissinger's comments on this situation
are at variance with the facts the
specter of important information
suggesting Soviet violation of strategic
arms limitations purposefully withheld
for extended periods of time from
analysts
soon makers and members of Congress has
caused great controversy within the
intelligence community in addition it
has raised questions as to the
president's own knowledge of and
concurrence with the hold procedure the
problem continues as official fears of
leaks and policymakers penchant for a
unified view on salt goes on former
State Department Bureau of intelligence
and research director ray s Klein and
testimony before the committee framed
the issue quote I do think the Congress
should be sure that the procedures for
handling of strategic intelligence
should have certain checks and balances
in them so that there is no possibility
of suppression of information that is
unattractive to policy makers end quote
Klein concluded quote as I was leaving
government I found these procedures
breaking down and that is why I feel
that the problem does deserve attention
from the Congress end quote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you